<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: /vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">

<head>
	<title>Endnotes by J. V. Stalin</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
	<section id="endnotes-stalin" epub:type="endnotes">
		<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes by <i>J. V. Stalin</i></h2>
		<ol>
			<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See Lenin's <i>Works</i>, Vol. XX, p. 104. See also the reports made at the Petrograd City Conference and at
					the All-Russian Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) (middle and end of April, 1917). <a
						href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-stalin-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Among these legends must be included also the very widespread story that Trotsky was the "sole" or "chief
					organiser" of the victories on the fronts of the civil war. I must declare, comrades, in the interest of
					truth, that this version is quite out of accord with the facts. I am far from denying that Trotsky played an
					important role in the civil war. But I must emphatically declare that the high honour of being the organiser
					of our victories belongs not to individuals, but to the great collective body of advanced workers in our
					country, the Russian Communist Party. Perhaps it will not be out of place to quote a few examples. You know
					that Kolchak and Denikin were regarded as the principal enemies of the Soviet Republic. You know that our
					country breathed freely only after those enemies were defeated. Well, history shows that both those enemies,
					i.e., Kolchak and Denikin, were routed by our troops <i>in spite</i> of Trotsky's plans.</p>
				<p>Judge for yourselves.</p>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p><em>Kolchak.</em> This is in the summer of 1919. Our troops are advancing against Kolchak and are
							operating near Ufa. A meeting of the Central Committee is held. Trotsky proposes that the advance be
							halted along the line of the River Belaya (near Ufa), leaving the Urals in the hands of Kolchak, and that
							part of the troops be withdrawn from the Eastern Front and transferred to the Southern Front. A heated
							debate takes place. The Central Committee disagrees with Trotsky, being of the opinion that the Urals,
							with its factories and railway network, must not be left in the hands of Kolchak, for the latter could
							easily recuperate there organise a strong force and reach the Volga again; Kolchak must first be driven
							beyond the Ural range into the Siberian steppes, and only after that has been done should forces be
							transferred to the South The Central Committee rejects Trotsky's plan. Trotsky hands in his resignation.
							The Central Committee refuses to accept it. Commander-in-Chief Vatsetis, who supported Trotsky's plan,
							resigns. His place is taken by a new Commander-in-Chief, Kamenev. From that moment Trotsky ceases to take
							a direct part in the affairs of the Eastern Front.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><em>Denikin.</em> This is in the autumn of 1919. The offensive against Denikin is not proceeding
							successfully. The "steel ring" around Mamontov (Mamontov's raid) is obviously collapsing. Denikin captures
							Kursk. Denikin is approaching Orel. Trotsky is summoned from the Southern Front to attend a meeting of the
							Central Committee. The Central Committee regards the situation as alarming and decides to send new
							military leaders to the Southern Front and to withdraw Trotsky. The new military leaders demand "no
							intervention" by Trotsky in the affairs of the Southern Front. Trotsky ceases to take a direct part in the
							affairs of the Southern Front. Operations on the Southern Front, right up to the capture of Rostov-on-Don
							and Odessa by our troops, proceed without Trotsky.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
				<p>Let anybody try to refute these facts. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-stalin-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
				</p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Obviously, this should be "a separate peace." <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-stalin-3"
						epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
		</ol>
	</section>
</body>

</html>
