<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: /vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">

<head>
	<title>Endnotes by S. W.</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
	<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
		<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes by <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.W.</abbr></i></h2>
		<ol>
			<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The "Contact Committee," consisting of Chkheidze, Steklov, Sukhanov, Filippovsky and Skobelev (and later
					Chernov and Tsereteli), was set up by the Menshevik and SocialistRevolutionary Executive Committee of the
					Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies on March 7, 1917, for the purpose of establishing contact
					with the Provisional Government, of "influencing" it and "controlling" its activities. Actually, the "Contact
					Committee" helped to carry out the bourgeois policy of the Provisional Government and restrained the masses of
					the workers from waging an active revolutionary struggle to transfer all power to the Soviets. The "Contact
					Committee" existed until May 1917, when representatives of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
					entered the provisional Government. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See V. I. Lenin, <i>Works</i>, 4th Russ. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.a.</abbr>, Vol. 24, pp. 1-7. <a
						href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
				</p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The Petrograd City Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) took place from April 27 to May 5 (April 14-22), 1917,
					with 57 delegates present. V. I. Lenin and J. V. Stalin took part in the proceedings. V. I. Lenin delivered a
					report on the current situation based on his April Theses. J. V. Stalin was elected to the commission for
					drafting the resolution on V. I. Lenin's report. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-3"
						epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Concerning the Seventh All-Russian April Conference of the Bolshevik Party see the <i>History of the
						C.P.S.U.(B.), Short Course</i>, Moscow 1952, pp. 291-96. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-4"
						epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See V. I. Lenin, <i>Works</i>, 4th Russ. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.a.</abbr>, Vol. 23, pp.
					289-333. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See "Speech by V. I. Lenin at the Meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 24 (11),
					1917, Concerning the Cancelling of the Demonstration" <i>(Works</i>, 4th Russ. <abbr
						epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.a.</abbr>, Vol. 25, pp. 62-63). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-6"
						epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies of the Northern Region took place in Petrograd on
					October 24-26 (11-13), 1917, under the direction of the Bolsheviks. Representatives were present from
					Petrograd, Moscow, Kronstadt, Novgorod, Reval, Helsingfors, Vyborg and other cities. In all there were 94
					delegates, of whom 51 were Bolsheviks. The congress adopted a resolution on the need for immediate
					transference of all power to the Soviets, central and local. It called upon the peasants to support the
					struggle for the transference of power to the Soviets and urged the Soviets themselves to commence active
					operations and to set up Revolutionary Military Committees for organising the military defence of the
					revolution. The congress set up a Northern Regional Committee and instructed it to prepare for the convocation
					of the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets and to co-ordinate the activities of all the Regional Soviets. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
				</p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See V. I. Lenin, <i>Works</i>, 4th Russ. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.a.</abbr>, Vol. 26. <a
						href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>See V. I. Lenin, <i>Works</i>, 4th Russ. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.a.</abbr>, Vol. 26. <a
						href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
		</ol>
	</section>
</body>

</html>
